[Docs] URL Drilldown (#76529)
elastic/kibana: docs/user/dashboard/url-drilldown.asciidoc

For example, you might have a dashboard that shows data from a Github repository.
You can create a drilldown that navigates from this dashboard to Github.
Refer to the <<try-it, Try it section>> for instructions on how to create this drilldown.

[role="screenshot"]
image:images/url_drilldown_go_to_github.gif[Drilldown on pie chart that navigates to Github]

NOTE: URL drilldown is available with the https://www.elastic.co/subscriptions[Gold subscription] and higher.

[float]
[[try-it]]
==== Try it: Create a URL drilldown

This example shows how to create the "Show on Github" drilldown shown earlier in this doc.

. Add the <<gs-get-data-into-kibana, sample web logs>> data set.
. Open the `[Logs] Web traffic` dashboard. This isn’t data from Github, but it should work for demonstration purposes.
. In the dashboard menu bar, click *Edit*.
. In `[Logs] Visitors by OS`, open the panel menu, and then select *Create drilldown*.
. Give the drilldown a name: *Show on Github*.
. Select a drilldown action: *Go to URL*.
[role="screenshot"]
image:images/url_drilldown_pick_an_action.png[Action picker]
. Enter a URL template: 
+
```

> https://github.com/elastic/kibana/issues?q=is:issue+is:open+{{event.value}}

Reviewer: This code block looks like so:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/9773803/92451370-e668e080-f1bc-11ea-9a36-9e3e734a5088.png)

Maybe we can make it like this:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/9773803/92451404-eec11b80-f1bc-11ea-9f12-dfedb4818b10.png)

Author: Thanks, agree

```
+
This example URL navigates to {kib} issues on Github. `{{event.value}}` will be substituted with a value associated with a clicked pie slice. Please note, that in _preview_ `{{event.value}}` is substituted with <<values-in-preview, dummy>> value.
[role="screenshot"]
image:images/url_drilldown_url_template.png[URL template input]
. Click *Create drilldown*.
. Save the dashboard.
+
If you don’t save the drilldown, and then navigate away, the drilldown is lost.

> . In `[Logs] Visitors by OS`, click any slice of the pie, and then select the drilldown *Show on Github*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In *[Logs] Visitors by OS*, click any slice of the pie, and then select the drilldown *Show on Github*.
```

+
[role="screenshot"]
image:images/url_drilldown_popup.png[URL drilldown popup]

You are navigated to the issue list in the {kib} repository. Verify that value from a pie slice you’ve clicked on is carried over to Github.

[role="screenshot"]
image:images/url_drilldown_github.png[Github]

[float]
[[trigger-picker]]
==== Picking a trigger for a URL drilldown

Some panels support multiple user interactions (called triggers) for which you can configure a URL drilldown. The list of supported variables in the URL template depends on the trigger you selected.
In the preceding <<try-it, example>>, you configured a URL drilldown on a pie chart. The only trigger that pie chart supports is clicking on a pie slice, so you didn’t have to pick a trigger.

However, the sample *[Logs] Unique Visitors vs. Average Bytes* chart supports both clicking on a data point and selecting a range. When you create a URL drilldown for this  chart, you have the following choices:

[role="screenshot"]
image:images/url_drilldown_trigger_picker.png[Trigger picker: single click and range selection]

Variables in the URL template differ per trigger. 

> For example, "single click" has `{{event.value}}` and "range selection" has `{{event.from}}` and `{{event.to}}`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, "Single click" has `{{event.value}}` and "Range selection" has `{{event.from}}` and `{{event.to}}`. 
```

You can create multiple URL drilldowns per panel and attach them to different triggers.

[float]
[[templating]]
==== URL templating language

The URL template input uses Handlebars — a simple templating language. Handlebars templates look like regular text with embedded Handlebars expressions.

```
https://github.com/elastic/kibana/issues?q={{event.value}}

> ```

Reviewer: Maybe we can make this code block appear on dark background as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
["source"]
-----------
https://github.com/elastic/kibana/issues?q={{event.value}}
-----------
```

[[helpers]]
In addition to https://handlebarsjs.com/guide/builtin-helpers.html[built-in] Handlebars helpers, you can use the following custom helpers:

|===
|Helper |Use case |Examples

|json
|Serialize variables in JSON format
|`{{json event}}` +
`{{json event.key event.value}}` +
`{{json filters=context.panel.filters}}`

|rison
|Serialize context variables in https://github.com/w33ble/rison-node[rison] format. Rison is a common format for {kib} apps for storing state in the URL.
|`{{rison event}}` +
`{{rison event.key event.value}}` +
`{{rison filters=context.panel.filters}}` +

|date
|Format dates. Supports relative dates expressions (for example,  "now-15d"). Refer to the https://momentjs.com/docs/#/displaying/format/[moment] docs for different formatting options.
|`{{ date event.from “YYYY MM DD”}}` + 
`{{date “now-15”}}`
|===

[float]
[[variables]]
==== URL template variables

The URL drilldown template has three sources for variables:

. *Global* static variables that don’t change depending on the  place where URL drilldown is used or which user interaction executed the drilldown. For example: `{{kibanaUrl}}`.

> . *Context* variables that change depending on where the drilldown is created and used. These variables are extracted from a context of a panel on a dashboard. Example: ``{{context.panel.filters}}`` which gives access to filters that applied to the current panel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. *Context* variables that change depending on where the drilldown is created and used. These variables are extracted from a context of a panel on a dashboard. Example: `{{context.panel.filters}}`, which gives access to filters that applied to the current panel.
```

> . *Event* variables that depend on the trigger context. These variables are dynamically extracted from the interaction context when the drilldown is executed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. *Event* variables that depend on user interaction. These variables are dynamically extracted from the interaction context when the drilldown is executed.
```

[[values-in-preview]]

> A subtle but important difference between *context* and *event* variables is that *context* variables use real values in previews when creating a URL drilldown. 

Reviewer: I'm thinking __event__ might also have some real data in preview in the future, for example the data table, maybe we should rephrase this somehow or omit.

Author: This is true and up for discussion in: https://github.com/elastic/kibana/issues/76226
But for now `event` variables are replaced by dummy values in preview, it could cause confusion and I wanted to emphasis this. We will remove this clarification when we improve that UX.

For example, `{{context.panel.filters}}` are previewed with the current filters that applied to a panel. 
*Event* variables are extracted during drilldown execution from a user interaction with a panel (for example, from a pie slice that the user clicked on).

Because there is no user interaction with a panel in preview, there is no interaction context to use in a preview.
To work around this, {kib} provides a sample interaction that relies on a picked <<trigger-picker, trigger>>.
So in a preview, you might notice that `{{event.value}}` is replaced with `{{event.value}}` instead of with a sample from your data.
Such previews can help you make sure that the structure of your URL template is valid.

> However, to ensure that the configured URL drilldown works as expected with your data, you have to retest the drilldown through the panel after saving a dashboard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, to ensure that the configured URL drilldown works as expected with real data, you have to save the dashboard and test it in the real panel.
```

You can access the full list of variables available for the current panel and selected trigger by clicking *Add variable* in the top-right corner of a URL template input.

[float]
[[variables-reference]]
==== Variables reference

> |===

Reviewer: The rendered table on the site does not look good, @gchaps are there any tricks we can do to improve the layout of the table? Otherwise I'm thinking maybe we should switch to a list to present this data. We could create three create three subs-sections under the "URL Template Variables" section:

- "Global variables"
- "Context variables"
- "Event variables"

Then, for example, these paragraphs:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/9773803/92455019-76a92480-f1c1-11ea-99c4-51c9675af9dc.png)

could be moved under the "Event variables" sub-section.

Author: I disagree that it looks `not good`. But I'd agree that it looks `not great` :D

> |Source |Variable |Description

Reviewer: I'm thinking it would be nice for each variable to also specified its type, like `string`, `number`, boolean`, etc.

```suggestion
|Source |Variable |Description |Type
```

Author: I don't want to overcomplicate it here, because it more complex that it seems :( 
for example:
1. `event.from` could be a data or a number depending on your data. 
2. context.filter is raw array of Kibana filters. best we could do is to say `list of filters`. but structure of them is really complicated. :( the idea is that users would just use it as is: `{{rison context.filters}}. or advanced users would experiment with structure in preview and it would be specific for their case. :(

> |*Global*
> |
> | Static variables that don’t change depending on the place where a URL drilldown is used or which user interaction executed the drilldown.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This row seems to be repeat from above bullet list:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/9773803/92453435-8b84b880-f1bf-11ea-9124-a2dfcbf4391e.png)

Author: Right. I plan that `Help` link from `add variables` popover would link directly to this reference. So left this description in the table for users how navigated directly to it

> |

Reviewer: Maybe for each row we can fill in the __Source__ column.

```suggestion
| Global
```

Author: I think would look more busy. 
There is not enough width for the table event with 3 columns

| kibanaUrl
| {kib} base URL. Useful for creating URL drilldowns that navigate within {kib}.

> | *Context*
> | 
> | Variables might change depending on where the drilldown is created and used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Maybe remove this as it repeats what was stated in the bullet list above.

> |
> | context.panel
> | Context provided by current dashboard panel.
> 
> |
> | context.panel.id
> | ID of a panel.
> 
> |
> | context.panel.title
> | Title of a panel.
> 
> | 
> | context.panel.filters
> | List of {kib} filters applied to a panel. +  

Reviewer: Here too:

```suggestion
| Context
| context.panel
| Context provided by current dashboard panel.

| Context
| context.panel.id
| ID of a panel.

| Context
| context.panel.title
| Title of a panel.

| Context
| context.panel.filters
| List of {kib} filters applied to a panel. +  
```

_Tip: Use in combination with <<helpers, rison>> helper for internal {kib} navigations with carrying over current filters._

| 
| context.panel.query.query
| Current query string.

| 
| context.panel.query.lang
| Current query language.

| 
| context.panel.timeRange.from +
context.panel.timeRange.to
| Current time picker values. +
_Tip: Use in combination with <<helpers, date>> helper to format date_.

| 
| context.panel.timeRange.indexPatternId +
context.panel.timeRange.indexPatternIds 
|Index pattern ids used by a panel. 

|
| context.panel.savedObjectId
| ID of saved object behind a panel.

> | *Event*
> | 
> | Variables that depend on a trigger context. These variables are dynamically extracted from the interaction context when the drilldown is executed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Maybe remove this as it repeats what was stated in the bullet list above.

| *Single click* trigger
| 

> | Variables available when *single click* trigger is used. 

Reviewer: Maybe 

```suggestion
| Variables available when "Single click" trigger is used. 
```

as before `"Single click"` appeared in quotes `"`.

Author: I like `*` more and for consistency made it `*` 👍

|
| event.value
| Value behind clicked data point.

|
| event.key
| Field name behind clicked data point

|
| event.negate

> | If drilldown executed is a "negative" context. (for example, a "filter-out" loop clicked...)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Boolean, indicating whether clicked data point resulted in negative filter.
```

[[url-drilldown]]
=== URL Drilldown

The URL drilldown allows you to navigate from a dashboard to an internal or external URL.
The destination URL can be dynamic, depending on the dashboard context or user’s interaction with a visualization.

For example, you might have a dashboard that shows data from a Github repository.
You can create a drilldown that navigates from this dashboard to Github.

> Refer to the <<try-it, Try it section>> for instructions on how to create this drilldown.

Reviewer 2: Remove "Refer to the try it section ..." because that section immediately follows this section

[role="screenshot"]
image:images/url_drilldown_go_to_github.gif[Drilldown on pie chart that navigates to Github]

NOTE: URL drilldown is available with the https://www.elastic.co/subscriptions[Gold subscription] and higher.

[float]
[[try-it]]
==== Try it: Create a URL drilldown

This example shows how to create the "Show on Github" drilldown shown earlier in this doc.

. Add the <<gs-get-data-into-kibana, sample web logs>> data set.
. Open the `[Logs] Web traffic` dashboard. This isn’t data from Github, but it should work for demonstration purposes.
. In the dashboard menu bar, click *Edit*.
. In `[Logs] Visitors by OS`, open the panel menu, and then select *Create drilldown*.
. Give the drilldown a name: *Show on Github*.
. Select a drilldown action: *Go to URL*.
[role="screenshot"]
image:images/url_drilldown_pick_an_action.png[Action picker]
. Enter a URL template: 
+
[source, bash]
----
https://github.com/elastic/kibana/issues?q=is:issue+is:open+{{event.value}}
----
+

> This example URL navigates to {kib} issues on Github. `{{event.value}}` will be substituted with a value associated with a clicked pie slice. Please note, that in _preview_ `{{event.value}}` is substituted with <<values-in-preview, dummy>> value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This example URL navigates to {kib} issues on Github. `{{event.value}}` will be substituted with a value associated with a clicked pie slice. In _preview_ `{{event.value}}` is substituted with a <<values-in-preview, dummy>> value.
```

[role="screenshot"]
image:images/url_drilldown_url_template.png[URL template input]
. Click *Create drilldown*.
. Save the dashboard.
+
If you don’t save the drilldown, and then navigate away, the drilldown is lost.

. In *[Logs] Visitors by OS*, click any slice of the pie, and then select the drilldown *Show on Github*.
+
[role="screenshot"]
image:images/url_drilldown_popup.png[URL drilldown popup]

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
+
```

You are navigated to the issue list in the {kib} repository. Verify that value from a pie slice you’ve clicked on is carried over to Github.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
+
```

[role="screenshot"]
image:images/url_drilldown_github.png[Github]

[float]
[[trigger-picker]]
==== Picking a trigger for a URL drilldown

Some panels support multiple user interactions (called triggers) for which you can configure a URL drilldown. The list of supported variables in the URL template depends on the trigger you selected.

> In the preceding <<try-it, example>>, you configured a URL drilldown on a pie chart. The only trigger that pie chart supports is clicking on a pie slice, so you didn’t have to pick a trigger.

Reviewer 2: "example" doesn't need to be a link

image:images/url_drilldown_trigger_picker.png[Trigger picker: Single click and Range selection]

Variables in the URL template differ per trigger. 
For example, *Single click* has `{{event.value}}` and *Range selection* has `{{event.from}}` and `{{event.to}}`. 
You can create multiple URL drilldowns per panel and attach them to different triggers.

[float]
[[templating]]
==== URL templating language

The URL template input uses Handlebars — a simple templating language. Handlebars templates look like regular text with embedded Handlebars expressions.

[source, bash]
----
https://github.com/elastic/kibana/issues?q={{event.value}}
----

A Handlebars expression is a `{{`, some contents, followed by a `}}`. When the drilldown is executed, these expressions are replaced by values from the dashboard and interaction context.

Refer to Handlebars https://handlebarsjs.com/guide/expressions.html#expressions[documentation] to learn about advanced use cases.

[[helpers]]
In addition to https://handlebarsjs.com/guide/builtin-helpers.html[built-in] Handlebars helpers, you can use the following custom helpers:

|===
|Helper |Use case |Examples

|json
|Serialize variables in JSON format

> |`{{json event}}` +

Reviewer 2: The third column of this table is wrapping funny.  Instead of a "+" at the end of each line, try  "a|" at the beginning.  For example

a|`{{json event}}`

`{{json event.key event.value}}` +
`{{json filters=context.panel.filters}}`

|rison
|Serialize variables in https://github.com/w33ble/rison-node[rison] format. Rison is a common format for {kib} apps for storing state in the URL.
|`{{rison event}}` +
`{{rison event.key event.value}}` +
`{{rison filters=context.panel.filters}}` +

|date
|Format dates. Supports relative dates expressions (for example,  "now-15d"). Refer to the https://momentjs.com/docs/#/displaying/format/[moment] docs for different formatting options.
|`{{ date event.from “YYYY MM DD”}}` + 
`{{date “now-15”}}`
|===

[float]
[[variables]]
==== URL template variables

The URL drilldown template has three sources for variables:

> . *Global* static variables that don’t change depending on the  place where URL drilldown is used or which user interaction executed the drilldown. For example: `{{kibanaUrl}}`.

Reviewer 2: Use a bulleted list "*" instead of a numbered list "."

> . *Global* static variables that don’t change depending on the  place where URL drilldown is used or which user interaction executed the drilldown. For example: `{{kibanaUrl}}`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. *Global* static variables that don’t change depending on the  place where the URL drilldown is used or which user interaction executed the drilldown. For example: `{{kibanaUrl}}`.
```

> . *Context* variables that change depending on where the drilldown is created and used. These variables are extracted from a context of a panel on a dashboard. Example: `{{context.panel.filters}}`, which gives access to filters that applied to the current panel.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. *Context* variables that change depending on where the drilldown is created and used. These variables are extracted from a context of a panel on a dashboard. For example, `{{context.panel.filters}}`ngives access to filters that applied to the current panel.
```

. *Event* variables that depend on the trigger context. These variables are dynamically extracted from the interaction context when the drilldown is executed.

[[values-in-preview]]
A subtle but important difference between *context* and *event* variables is that *context* variables use real values in previews when creating a URL drilldown. 
For example, `{{context.panel.filters}}` are previewed with the current filters that applied to a panel. 
*Event* variables are extracted during drilldown execution from a user interaction with a panel (for example, from a pie slice that the user clicked on).

> Because there is no user interaction with a panel in preview, there is no interaction context to use in a preview.

Reviewer 2: Include a line break (empty line) above the sentences that starts "Because there is..." so that it becomes two separate paragraphs.
